OSDOCS-8991: OLM on MicroShift intro (#70128)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/microshift-olm-deploy-ops-spec-ns.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="microshift-OLM-deploy-Operators-specific-namespace_{context}"]
= Adding OLM-based Operators to a networked cluster in a specific namespace

Use this procedure if you want to specify a single namespace for an Operator, for example, `olm-microshift`. In this example, the catalog is scoped and available in the global `openshift-marketplace` namespace. For {microshift-short} clusters that have network connectivity, Operator Lifecycle Manager (OLM) can access sources hosted on remote registries.

[IMPORTANT]
====
All of the Operators installed in a specific namespace must have the same watch scope.
====

.Prerequisites
* The {oc-first} is installed.
* Operator Lifecycle Manager (OLM) is installed.
* You have created a custom catalog that is running in the global namespace.

.Procedure

. Confirm that OLM is running by using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n openshift-operator-lifecycle-manager get pod -l app=olm-operator
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME                            READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
olm-operator-66c97f894f-55wp2   1/1     Running   0          126m
----

> . Confirm that the pod the catalog runs in is active by using the following command:

Reviewer: It is not the catalog itself (nor its Pod) - it's an operator that handled `CatalogSource`
```suggestion
. Confirm that the OLM's Catalog Operator is active by using the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n openshift-operator-lifecycle-manager get pod -l app=catalog-operator
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME                                READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
catalog-operator-7cf77c459d-jbrd7   1/1     Running   0          126m
----

//Q which directory do we place these YAMLs in? do we need to specify?
. Optional. Create a namespace by using the following command and example YAML:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ sudo cat _<ns.yaml>_ <1>

Reviewer: Do we need these `cat`s? They only print the content of the file, `oc apply` is what does the job

Author: How do we create the YAMLS, and in what directory? Does OLM create default yamls for the user to edit?

Author: No, you're right, we're giving them a sample file right here.

+
----
$ oc apply -f _<ns.yaml>_ <1>
----
<1> Replace _<ns.yaml>_ with the name of your namespace configuration file.
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
namespace/olm-microshift created
----

. Create the Operator group YAML by using the following command and example YAML:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo cat _<og.yaml>_ <1>
----
<1> Replace _<og.yaml>_ with the name of your operator group configuration file.
+
.Example Operator group YAML
[source,yaml]
----
kind: OperatorGroup
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1
metadata:
  name: og
  namespace: olm-microshift
spec: <1>
  targetNamespaces:
  - olm-microshift
----
<1> Omit the `spec.targetNamespaces` field and values for Operators using the global namespace.

. Apply the Operator group configuration by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo oc apply -f _<og.yaml>_ <1>
----
<1> Replace _<og.yaml>_ with the name of your operator group configuration file.
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
operatorgroup.operators.coreos.com/og created
----

. Create the `CatalogSource` object by using the following command and example YAML:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ sudo cat _<my-catalog-source.yaml>_ <1>

Reviewer: I guess it should be `oc apply` instead of `sudo cat`?

Do we want to wait for readiness?

```
$ oc describe catalogsources.operators.coreos.com -n openshift-operators operatorhubio-catalog
Name:         operatorhubio-catalog
Namespace:    openshift-operators
Labels:       <none>
Annotations:  <none>
API Version:  operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
Kind:         CatalogSource
Metadata:
  Creation Timestamp:  2024-01-30T12:05:14Z
  Generation:          1
  Resource Version:    59582
  UID:                 1260f123-1189-4b68-8153-841a56ee7a5d
Spec:
  Display Name:  Community Operators
  Grpc Pod Config:
    Security Context Config:  restricted
  Image:                      quay.io/operatorhubio/catalog:latest
  Publisher:                  OperatorHub.io
  Source Type:                grpc
  Update Strategy:
    Registry Poll:
      Interval:  60m
Status:
  Connection State:
    Address:                   operatorhubio-catalog.openshift-operators.svc:50051
    Last Connect:              2024-01-30T12:05:42Z
    Last Observed State:       READY
  Latest Image Registry Poll:  2024-01-30T13:05:14Z
  Registry Service:
    Created At:         2024-01-30T12:05:14Z
    Port:               50051
    Protocol:           grpc
    Service Name:       operatorhubio-catalog
    Service Namespace:  openshift-operators
Events:                 <none>
```

```
$ oc get pods -n openshift-operators -l olm.catalogSource=operatorhubio-catalog
NAME                          READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
operatorhubio-catalog-5tswm   1/1     Running   0          99m
```

//Q which directory do we place these YAMLs in? do we need to specify?
. Create a namespace by using the following example YAML:
+
.Example namespace YAML
[source,YAML]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: olm-microshift
----
+
. Apply the namespace configuration using the following command:
+
----
$ oc apply -f _<ns.yaml>_ <1>
----
<1> Replace _<ns.yaml>_ with the name of your namespace configuration file.
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
namespace/olm-microshift created
----

. Create the Operator group YAML by using the following example YAML:
+
.Example Operator group YAML
[source,yaml]
----
kind: OperatorGroup
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1
metadata:
  name: og
  namespace: olm-microshift
spec: <1>
  targetNamespaces:
  - olm-microshift
----
<1> Omit the `spec.targetNamespaces` field and values for Operators using the global namespace.

. Apply the Operator group configuration by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo oc apply -f _<og.yaml>_ <1>
----
<1> Replace _<og.yaml>_ with the name of your operator group configuration file.
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
operatorgroup.operators.coreos.com/og created
----

> . Create the `CatalogSource` object by using the following example YAML:

Reviewer: We are missing `oc apply` for the CatalogSource - it jumps straight to verifying its readiness

    Service Namespace:  openshift-operators
Events:                 <none>
----

. Confirm that the catalog source is running by using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get pods -n openshift-operators -l olm.catalogSource=operatorhubio-catalog
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME                          READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
operatorhubio-catalog-5tswm   1/1     Running   0          99m
----

. Create a Subscription CR configuration file by using the following example YAML:
+
.Example Subscription custom resource YAML
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Subscription
metadata:
  name: my-cert-manager
  namespace: openshift-operators
spec:
  channel: stable
  name: cert-manager
  source: operatorhubio-catalog
  sourceNamespace: openshift-marketplace <1>
----
<1> The global namespace. Subscriptions CRs in any namespace can reference catalogs created in the `openshift-marketplace` namespace.

. Apply the Subscription CR configuration by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f _<my-subscription-cr.yaml>_
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----

> subscription.operators.coreos.com/nginx-ok1-1399 created

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subscription.operators.coreos.com/my-cert-manager created
```

----

. Create an operand configuration file by using the following command and example YAML:

> //TODO need an example of deploying an operand to complete this procedure?

Reviewer: By operand you mean CR for the deployed operator? Like in this case for cert-manager?

Beside that, since we're including commands to verify if something is ready, we might want to add command to see the operator is running, e.g.:

```
$ oc get pods -n openshift-operators
NAME                                                              READY   STATUS      RESTARTS   AGE
cert-manager-7df8994ddb-qnxjw                                     1/1     Running     0          30m
cert-manager-cainjector-5746db8fd7-74njj                          1/1     Running     0          30m
cert-manager-webhook-84d67cfcb6-db7f6                             1/1     Running     0          30m
```

Author: Yes, exactly. In Daniel's demo, he has the extra step of applying a CR "operand" after applying the Subscription CR. He applies the specific `Kind: Inifispan` (at about minute 10:30). Do we have one we can add cert-manager for this example?

Reviewer 2: That's definitely going to make your documentation rot. We don't have a 1:1 relationship between openshift releases and the stuff that goes into the catalogs. Operators can add breaking changes to the latest version whenever they want. I would avoid doing this, as you're essentially documenting the cert-manager operator at that point

Author: @kevinrizza Do we need to note that the user can then install whatever operand (generic narrative step), or do we just leave it there?

//Module included in the following assemblies:
//
//* microshift_running_apps/microshift-operators-olm.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="microshift-OLM-deploy-Operators-specific-namespace_{context}"]
= Adding OLM-based Operators to a networked cluster in a specific namespace

Use this procedure if you want to specify a namespace for an Operator, for example, `olm-microshift`. In this example, the catalog is scoped and available in the global `openshift-marketplace` namespace. The Operator uses content from the global namespace, but runs only in the `olm-microshift` namespace. For {microshift-short} clusters that have network connectivity, Operator Lifecycle Manager (OLM) can access sources hosted on remote registries.

[IMPORTANT]
====

> All of the Operators installed in a specific namespace must have the same watch scope. In this case, the watch scope is *All namespaces*.

Reviewer 3: @ShaunaDiaz `All namespaces` should be `own namespace`

Author: Ah, so the Operator can still use content from the `openshift-marketplace` namespace even if the watch scope is `own namespace`?

kind: CatalogSource
metadata:
  name: operatorhubio-catalog
  namespace: openshift-marketplace <1>
spec:
  sourceType: grpc
  image: quay.io/operatorhubio/catalog:latest
  displayName: Community Operators <2>
  publisher: OperatorHub.io
  grpcPodConfig:
    securityContextConfig: restricted <3>
  updateStrategy:
    registryPoll:
      interval: 60m
----
<1> The global namespace. Setting the `metadata.namespace` to `openshift-marketplace` enables the catalog to run in all namespaces. Subscriptions CRs in any namespace can reference catalogs created in the `openshift-marketplace` namespace.
<2> Community Operators are not installed by default with OLM for {miroshift-short}. Listed here for example only.
<3> The value of `securityContextConfig` must be set to `restricted` for {microshift-short}.

. Apply the `CatalogSource` configuration by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f _<my-catalog-source.yaml>_ <1>
----
<1> Replace _<my-catalog-source.yaml>_ with your catalog source configuration file name.

. To verify that the catalog source is applied, check for `READY` state by using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc describe catalogsources.operators.coreos.com -n openshift-operators operatorhubio-catalog

Reviewer 3: @ShaunaDiaz `openshift-operators` should be `openshift-marketplace`
and also need to update the output of this command

Author: Does that include the Service Namespace as well? Note: I spent yesterday working on getting a test env (and TY for the Jenkins). Will try some testing today, see where I get.

Labels:       <none>
Annotations:  <none>
API Version:  operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
Kind:         CatalogSource
Metadata:
  Creation Timestamp:  2024-01-30T12:05:14Z
  Generation:          1
  Resource Version:    59582
  UID:                 1260f123-1189-4b68-8153-841a56ee7a5d
Spec:
  Display Name:  Community Operators
  Grpc Pod Config:
    Security Context Config:  restricted
  Image:                      quay.io/operatorhubio/catalog:latest
  Publisher:                  OperatorHub.io
  Source Type:                grpc
  Update Strategy:
    Registry Poll:
      Interval:  60m
Status:
  Connection State:
    Address:                   operatorhubio-catalog.openshift-operators.svc:50051
    Last Connect:              2024-01-30T12:05:42Z
    Last Observed State:       READY
  Latest Image Registry Poll:  2024-01-30T13:05:14Z
  Registry Service:
    Created At:         2024-01-30T12:05:14Z
    Port:               50051
    Protocol:           grpc
    Service Name:       operatorhubio-catalog
    Service Namespace:  openshift-operators
Events:                 <none>
----

. Confirm that the catalog source is running by using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get pods -n openshift-operators -l olm.catalogSource=operatorhubio-catalog

Reviewer 3: @ShaunaDiaz `openshift-operators` should be `openshift-marketplace`

----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME                          READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
operatorhubio-catalog-5tswm   1/1     Running   0          99m
----

. Create a Subscription CR configuration file by using the following example YAML:
+
.Example Subscription custom resource YAML
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Subscription
metadata:
  name: my-cert-manager
  namespace: olm-microshift <1>
spec:
  channel: stable

>   name: cert-manager

Reviewer 3: @ShaunaDiaz please do not use cert-manager as example because it only support all namesapce mode.
here is my checking which is from csv of operator
```console
      displayName: cert-manager
      installModes:
      - supported: false
        type: OwnNamespace
      - supported: false
        type: SingleNamespace
      - supported: false
        type: MultiNamespace
      - supported: true
        type: AllNamespaces
```
while the example procedure here is for own namesapce mode because you said
1, The Operator uses content from the global namespace, but runs only in the `olm-microshift` namespace
2, you define og as 
```yaml
kind: OperatorGroup
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1
metadata:
  name: og
  namespace: olm-microshift
spec: <1>
  targetNamespaces:
  - olm-microshift
```
so the installation fails.

one general suggestion: please execute the step before you work out to see if it works or not. it apply for section `Adding OLM-based Operators to a networked cluster in a specific namespace` and `Adding OLM-based Operators to a networked cluster using the global namespace`. or else, the step and output are possible wrong.

Author: @kuiwang02 Apologies, I do not have a working test environment or VM that runs MicroShift.

Reviewer 3: @ShaunaDiaz never mind :)
you could use https://mastern-jenkins-csb-openshift-qe.apps.ocp-c1.prod.psi.redhat.com/job/microshift/job/microshift-deployment-pipeline to create env.
here is the build https://mastern-jenkins-csb-openshift-qe.apps.ocp-c1.prod.psi.redhat.com/job/microshift/job/microshift-deployment-pipeline/4396/ I used to create env for example

this jenkins job is maintained by @jogeo and @dhensel-rh (thanks). I think you could contact with them if there is problem.

----

. Confirm that the OLM catalog Operator is running by using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n openshift-operator-lifecycle-manager get pod -l app=catalog-operator
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME                                READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
catalog-operator-5fc7f857b6-tj8cf   1/1     Running   0          16m
----

. Create a namespace by using the following example YAML:
+
.Example namespace YAML
[source,YAML]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: olm-microshift
----
+
. Apply the namespace configuration using the following command:
+
----
$ oc apply -f _<ns.yaml>_ <1>
----
<1> Replace _<ns.yaml>_ with the name of your namespace configuration file. In this example, `olm-microshift` is used.
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
namespace/olm-microshift created
----

. Create the Operator group YAML by using the following example YAML:
+
.Example Operator group YAML
[source,yaml]
----
kind: OperatorGroup
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1
metadata:
  name: og
  namespace: olm-microshift
spec: <1>
  targetNamespaces:
  - olm-microshift
----

> <1> Omit the `spec.targetNamespaces` field and values for Operators using the global namespace.

Reviewer 4: Reword as: "For Operators using the global namespace, omit the `spec.targetNamespaces` field and values."

. Apply the Operator group configuration by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ sudo oc apply -f _<og.yaml>_ <1>

Reviewer 5: Is there a reason you switch to using sudo for this command ? It is not consistent with the other commands in the document.

----
<1> Replace _<og.yaml>_ with the name of your operator group configuration file.
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
operatorgroup.operators.coreos.com/og created
----

. Create the `CatalogSource` object by using the following example YAML:
+
.Example catalog source YAML
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: CatalogSource
metadata:
  name: operatorhubio-catalog
  namespace: openshift-marketplace <1>
spec:
  sourceType: grpc
  image: quay.io/operatorhubio/catalog:latest
  displayName: Community Operators <2>
  publisher: OperatorHub.io
  grpcPodConfig:
    securityContextConfig: restricted <3>
  updateStrategy:
    registryPoll:
      interval: 60m
----
<1> The global namespace. Setting the `metadata.namespace` to `openshift-marketplace` enables the catalog to run in all namespaces. Subscriptions CRs in any namespace can reference catalogs created in the `openshift-marketplace` namespace.

> <2> Community Operators are not installed by default with OLM for {miroshift-short}. Listed here for example only.

Reviewer 5: It took me a minute to see it, but I think `microshift-short` is misspelled.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get pods -n openshift-marketplace -l olm.catalogSource=operatorhubio-catalog
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME                          READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
operatorhubio-catalog-j7sc8   1/1     Running   0          43s
----

. Create a Subscription CR configuration file by using the following example YAML:
+
.Example Subscription custom resource YAML
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Subscription
metadata:
  name: my-gitlab-operator-kubernetes
  namespace: olm-microshift <1>
spec:
  channel: stable
  name: gitlab-operator-kubernetes
  source: operatorhubio-catalog
  sourceNamespace: openshift-marketplace <2>
----
<1> The specific namespace. Operators reference the global namespace for content, but run in the `olm-microshift` namespace.
<2> The global namespace. Subscriptions CRs in any namespace can reference catalogs created in the `openshift-marketplace` namespace.

. Apply the Subscription CR configuration by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f _<my-subscription-cr.yaml>_
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----

> subscription.operators.coreos.com/my-cert-manager created

Reviewer 5: This is not consistent with the name used in the spec

Reviewer 5: This is my output. I think it uses the name under metadata instead of name under spec

`oc apply -f my_customresource.yaml
subscription.operators.coreos.com/my-gitlab-operator-kubernetes created`
